## Arabian Peninsula / Saudi Arabia

The Arabian Peninsula is the world’s largest peninsula by area, covering 3.2 million square kilometers. It was formed between 56 and 23 million years ago, following the rifting of the Red Sea. Geographically, the peninsula can be referred to as Arabian Subcontinent since it lies on its tectonic plate, known as the Arabian plate.

The Arabian plate is moving gradually away from Africa (creating the Red Sea) toward the Eurasia plate (forming the  Zagros Mountain). The peninsula’s most prominent feature is a desert. However, mountain ranges dot the southwestern portion, which tends to be cooler and wetter than the rest of the peninsula. 

The peninsula consists of 7 countries, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Qatar, and Kuwait. In most of the countries on the Arabian Peninsula, oil and gas are the main drivers of the economy. In fact, almost a third of the entire world’s oil reserves are located in countries of the Arabian Peninsula. The peninsula also hosts important religious sites, as it is where Islam was founded. 

### Countries

Initially, the Arabian Peninsula was divided into four main regions; Hadhramaut (Indian Ocean Coast), Al-Yamama (Central Plateaus), Al-Bahrain (Persian Gulf Coast), and Tihamah (Red Sea Coast). Today, the peninsula is subdivided into six countries, with two more countries also extending onto the peninsula. The six countries located wholly on the peninsula are Saudi Arabia, Oman, Kuwait, Qatar, Yemen, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The southern portion of Jordan and Iraq also extends onto the peninsula. Geopolitically, Bahrain is also part of the peninsula.

The UAE, Qatar, and Kuwait are located on the peninsula’s eastern portion. Oman occupies the southeastern part, while Yemen is in the south. Saudi Arabia is at the center, while Bahrain lies on the peninsula’s east coast. Saudi Arabia is the largest country on the peninsula, occupying 2.15 million square kilometers or 66% of the peninsula’s total area. Yemen is the second-largest country, covering about 16%, while Oman occupies about 9.6%. Qatar is the smallest country on the mainland peninsula, while Bahrain is the smallest country within its geopolitical region. 

### Geographical features

Several geographical features characterize the Arabian Peninsula’s landscape, including plateaus, desert range, mountains, and coastlands. The peninsula is mostly covered by deserts, making it one of the world’s driest regions. The Nafud Desert on the northern part stretches over 103,600 square kilometers and is 290 km long and 225 km wide. This desert is known for sudden violent wind responsible for the crescent-shaped dunes. On the south is the Rub’ al Khali Desert that is part of the Great Arabian Desert. This desert covers 650,000 square kilometers or about one-third of the Arabian Desert and includes parts of Yemen, The UAE, Oman, and Saudi Arabia.

The mountains are found along the peninsula’s northwestern, southern, and eastern borders. The Hajar Mountains are the highest mountain ranges on the east and are shared by Oman and the UAE. The Dhofar Mountains are found on the southeastern side, specifically in Oman. On the west are Hijaz, Asir, and Haraz Mountains. Other mountains on the peninsula include Shammar, Tuwair, and Jabal Hadhur (the peninsula’s highest mountain). 

The peninsula is also crossed by a plateau of more than 760 meters above sea level. The central plateau is known for pasture and fertile valleys, making it suitable for livestock grazing. The peninsula has few rivers or lakes, with the area drained by wadis which are dry most of the time. Oases form mainly where there is surface water. Two of the largest oases in the world, Qatif, and Al-Hasa are in Arabia. 

Arabia may be described as a vast plateau, edged with deeply dissected escarpments on three sides and sloping gently northeastward from the Red Sea to the eastern lowlands adjoining the Persian Gulf. The peninsula’s highest peak, Al-Nabī Shuʿayb, at 12,008 feet (3,660 metres), is located approximately 20 miles northwest of Sanaa in Yemen.

The bulk of Arabia consists of two main geomorphological areas: the Arabian shield in the west; and sedimentary areas dipping away from the shield to the northeast, east, and southeast into the great basin consisting of lower Iraq, the Persian Gulf, and the eastern part of the Rubʿ al-Khali (“Empty Quarter”) desert. The eastern edge of the shield curves eastward from the head of the Gulf of Aqaba, a northern extension of the Red Sea, to a point midway across the peninsula and then trends southwestward and southward to the Yemeni highlands. Extinct volcanoes overlie the shield; their eruptions, which ceased seven centuries ago, produced the broad black lava beds (ḥārrahs) that are characteristic of the western Arabian landscape.


### Climate

The climate of the Arabian Peninsula is extremely dry and arid. As is common in the neighboring area, the Arabian Peninsula receives very little annual rainfall. Compounding the lack of precipitation, the Arabian Peninsula also has few lakes or permanent rivers, two facts which combine to produce an extremely dry landscape that is not conducive to settled civilizations. The few rivers that do exist in the region, referred to as wadis, are only full during the wet seasons. During any other period of time the wadis are dry. The dry climate, combined with lack of available water, does not permit large scale agricultural development. The only place where cultivation can occur is near the oases, but these are very few locations within a desert so large.

Geographically, the terrain of the Arabian Peninsula consists of a large central plateau, a variety of deserts, marshy coast lands, and stretches of mountains. The main feature of the peninsula is the central plateau, which reaches a breathtaking height of 2,500 feet. Unlike many plateaus, the central plateau of the Arabian Peninsula is not flat; it slowly slopes towards the Gulf. The region as a whole is distinguished by a large variety of geographic variance, ranging from the central plateau to the stony deserts in the north, and the coast lands that are resplendent with coral reefs in the Red Sea. The Arabian Peninsula also boasts the largest uninterrupted sand dune in the world, called the Empty Quarter. The Empty Quarter runs for 40 kilometers and features linear sand dunes.

Some geologists claim that the Arabian Peninsula should be more accurately classified as a subcontinent, due to the fact that it is placed on a tectonic plate that is completely separate from any neighboring continents. To support this theory, the geologists claim that the tectonic plate the Arabian Peninsula is on is slowly moving away from the plate under northeast Africa. 

### Economy 

The primary exports of the Arabian Peninsula are oil and natural gas, both of which are found abundantly in the region. Because these commodities are desired by industrialized nations around the world, the Arabian Peninsula can use its natural resources as a means to direct political action. The ability to use oil as a political force is most apparent in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) that unites all of the oil exporting countries in the region as a political unit. By consolidating the political power of all the oil exporting countries, OPEC is able to guide political action in the world through the threat of withholding oil resources. The influx of wealth from the oil industry also provides many of the necessary services for governments in the region, such as the funds for construction projects or the financial service sector. 

### Popuplation

The vast majority of Arabians are ethnic Arabs, and a large number are able to trace their ancestry back through many generations living in the same area. Nearly all speak Arabic, and differences in dialects, though substantial, do not bar mutual intelligibility. Since the Islamic expansion of the mid-7th century, most Arabians have been Muslim. Differences in sects are important locally, as in Bahrain and Yemen, but the historic commitment of the peninsula to the faith of its son, the Prophet Muhammad, has done more to unite than divide it.

Culture has found expression in forms that are the joint inheritance of all the peoples of the Arabian Peninsula, and that inheritance is shared with Arab and Muslim societies beyond the region. Poetry, religious laws and precepts, and values associated with heroism permeated the culture of the past, but the innovations associated with Western culture reached the entire peninsula in the 20th century and have substantially influenced art, mores, and behaviour.

Most of the states of the peninsula share common political systems. Nearly all are or have been monarchies, based in large part on principles of religious legitimacy. In the 20th century, especially since World War II, they aimed at gradual change in political life while trying to achieve rapid economic and social advancement. Although the peninsula’s available natural resources are not distributed equally among its states—those in the south and southwest derive far less wealth from oil, for example—similar economic transformations have taken place, or are taking place, in all the societies. Urbanization, greater access to health care and education, secularization, and the settling of many nomads have changed the fabric of daily life throughout the area.

### Why travel to Saudi Arabia ? 

Few people have had the opportunity of experiencing Saudi Arabia. Up until 2019, Saudi Arabia was the only country that didn’t accept tourists. But Saudi Arabia has so much to offer. Only soldiers, expatriates, Muslims on religious trips, and government officials were allowed into the country before it opened up to foreign tourists from all countries in 2019.

Making the Kingdom Of Saudi Arabia one of the least explored countries in the world for tourists. It’s a country filled with multiple tourist hotspots, mesmerizing landscapes, monuments, and mouth-watering restaurants. A trip to this corner of the world is stunning. 

Two of Islam’s holiest cities are situated in Saudi Arabia: Mecca and Medina, which are revered by over 1 billion Muslims. Mecca is home to the building constructed by the prophet Abraham and Ishmael called the Kaaba. Medina holds the tomb of Prophet Muhammad. Muslims believe Prophet Muhammad was the final “messenger of God” after Jesus and Moses. f you share the same spiritual beliefs or have a fascination for Islam, then you must make it a point to soak in the beauty and spirituality of these cities. Religious sentiment becomes even more evident during Hajj, an annual pilgrimage that all Muslims must make at least once in their lifetime. During Hajj, over 3 million Muslims gather in Mecca to complete their pilgrimage.

Saudi Arabia is home to some of the most fascinating discoveries that changed the face of history. These are the 9,000-year-old Al-Magar site, a human footprint almost 85,000 years old, and the Pharaonic inscription of Ramses the Third.  Most historical sites in Saudi Arabia were unknown to the outside world until recently, when Saudi Arabia started to open up for foreign tourists. You can also visit Hail, a province that contains a wide variety of pre-Islamic rock art. Hail covers almost 10,000 years of Saudi Arabia’s history. The tombs of Mada’in Saleh will mesmerize you with their craftsmanship and size.

Close to a third of Saudi Arabia’s population are immigrants. These citizens come from various backgrounds and different cultures. You will be able to experience this diversity when you visit this beautiful country. Saudi Arabia is also famous for its historical diversity. You can visit sites inhabited by local kings like the Barzan area in Hail and the Shubra Palace in Taif. You can move on to sites made by Islamic empires like Abbasid Darb Zubayada and the castle of Tabuk, which was built by the Ottomans.

If you aren’t much of a history freak, Saudi Arabia is home to countless beaches situated on the Red Sea. Many of these beaches are undiscovered.
People offer boat rides from cities like Yanbu, Al-lith, and Jeddah. If you’re lucky, you may spot remnants of ancient shipwrecks. If you’re looking for something more, the Red Sea offers an amazing scuba diving experience. You can soak in the exquisite marine life of the Red Sea, where you may spot sharks, turtles, colorful fish, and morays. Additionally, if you’re interested in birdwatching, both the Gulf Coast and the Red Sea are home to a wide variety of birds.

If you didn’t already know, Saudi Arabia is environmentally diverse as well. Yes, the majority of the country is filled with deserts, but there are beautiful beaches and mountains too. The Mountains of Asir are among the most untouched destinations in the world. Located in the southwest corner of the country, these mountains have deep and beautiful ravines with “hanging terraces” that are homes to animals like the baboon, eagle, and blue lizard. If you’re longing for a breath of fresh air and the peace and tranquility of the mountains, then you must make a trip to Asir.
The mountains of Asir, like the country’s coral reefs, remain one of the most untouched tourist destinations. During the peak of summer, you may find a juniper forest turned white because of a sudden hailstorm. 

Of the 10 reasons why you should visit Saudi Arabia, this is the most endearing to food lovers. Traditional Arabic food is one of the most loved and revered cuisines in the world. Trying out Arabian food is an important aspect in experiencing the culture of the country.  A typical local meal in Saudi Arabia, Kapsa, the National dish, is on both the big “yellow” plates. Each bite will fill your senses with joy. Most Arabian restaurants in the country feature traditional dishes like hummus bi tahini, couscous served with chicken, grilled halloumi, and falafels. Chicken and lamb are the most common types of meat used. Beef is used less. Pork is strictly prohibited as it goes against Islam. Arabian dishes are made with an array of unique spices that will surely make you drool over the food.